  * [Whitespace Total Fixer](#whitespace-total-fixer)
    * [Why you should use it](#why-you-should-use-it)
    * [Quick Install](#quick-install)
    * [How to use it](#how-to-use-it)
    * [Git `pre-commit` hooks](#git-pre-commit-hooks)
      * [Careful version](#careful-version)
      * [Simple version](#simple-version)
  * [Exciting origin story](#exciting-origin-story)
  * [Whitespace issues addressed](#whitespace-issues-addressed)
  * [Reporting](#reporting)
  * [Todo](#todo)
  * [Bugs](#bugs)
  * [Author](#author)
  * [License](#license)

Whitespace Total Fixer
======================

Identifies and/or fixes inconsistent whitespace and line endings in
text files, so that they don't clog up your commits to version control
systems like Git, Mercurial, or Subversion.

### Why you should use it:

* It's like an incomprehensible shell-script one-liner (e.g. `sed -e 's/LINENOISE/'`), but way better
* It's similar to [`git
  stripspace`](https://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/git-stripspace.html),
  but more flexible and detailed.
* `wtf.py` is a simple Python2 script (tested with 2.7.5) with *no
  dependencies beyond the standard Python library*.


### Quick Install
```
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dlenski/wtf/master/wtf.py > ~/bin/wtf.py && chmod 0755 !#:3
```

### How to use it

[See below](#options) for options to control exactly which
whitespace issues it fixes, but here are some examples:

```bash
# consistent whitespace from programs that generate text files
dump_database_schema | wtf.py -o clean_output.sql

# in-place editing
wtf.py -i file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt
wtf.py -I.bak file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt # ditto, with backups

# summarize a bunch of files without actually editing them (-0)
find . -name "*.txt" -exec wtf.py -0 {} \;

# more advanced: find interesting text files. pass options and a directory
wtf-find() {
    find "${@: -1}" -not \( -name .svn -prune -o -name .git -prune \
         -o -name .hg -prune \) -type f -exec bash -c \
         'grep -Il "" "$1" &>/dev/null && wtf.py '"${*:1:$#-1}"' "$1"' _ {} \;
}
wtf-find -0 .

# exit status
wtf.py file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt > /dev/null
if (( $? == 10 )); then
  echo "issues fixed"
elif (( $? == 20 )); then
  echo "unfixed issues!"
fi
```

Git `pre-commit` hooks
----------------------

You can use [Git `pre-commit` hooks](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Customizing-Git-Git-Hooks)
to automatically run `wtf` and cleanup whitespace in your repository
prior to every commit.

Create the file `.git/hooks/pre-commit` in your repository, and ensure that it is executable
(`chmod +x .git/hooks/pre-commit`).

### Careful version

This version will run `wtf`, with the default options, on all the
to-be-committed text files. It operates only on the contents of the index ("staging area") so it
will play nicely with `git add --patch` and it won't touch the files in your working tree
**won't be modified**.

```bash
#!/bin/sh

wtf_options='-q'
tmp=$(mktemp)

# Run Whitespace Total Fixer on index contents WITHOUT touching working directory
git diff-index --cached HEAD --diff-filter=ACMRTU |
while read _ MODE _ SHA1 _ FILE
do
    if ! ( git cat-file blob $SHA1 | wtf $wtf_options > $tmp ); then
        git update-index --cacheinfo $MODE $(git hash-object -w $tmp) "$FILE"
        echo "Fixed whitespace in $FILE" >&2
    fi
done
rm -f $tmp 2> /dev/null
```

### Simple version

This version will run `wtf -i`, with the default options, on all the
to-be-committed text files. They will be cleaned up in the commit, as
well as in your working tree. **This version will not play nicely with
`git add --patch`.**

```bash
#!/bin/sh
# get a list of to-be-committed filepaths, EXCLUDING files considered
# by Git to be binary
committees=$(git diff --cached --numstat --diff-filter=ACMRTU|egrep -v ^-|cut -f3-)

# Run Whitespace Total Fixer in-place, and re-add files modified by it
for committee in $committees
do
	wtf -i "$committee" || git add "$committee"
done
```

Exciting origin story
---------------------

One day at work, I spent way too much time wrangling commits
laden with whitespace issues generated by recalcitrant text-editing
tools on multiple platforms.

That evening, I went home and spent way too much time writing this
program instead!

<a name="options"/>Whitespace issues addressed
----------------------------------------------

WTF currently fixes, or simply reports, a few common types of whitespace
issues. Most of these issues offer three possible command-line options
enabling the user to fix, report, or ignore the issue.

* Remove trailing spaces at the ends of lines (default is **fix**):

        -t, --trail-space
        -T, --report-trail-space
        -It, --ignore-trail-space

* Remove blank lines at the ends of files (default is **fix**):

        -b, --eof-blanks
        -B, --report-eof-blanks
        -Ib, --ignore-eof-blanks

* Ensure that a new-line character appears at the end of the file (default is **fix**):

        -n, --eof-newl
        -N, --report-eof-newl
        -In, --ignore-eof-newl

* Make sure that all lines have matching EOL markers (that is, no
  mixing of lf/crlf). Default is to **fix** non-matching EOL
  characters by making them all the same as the first line of the
  file. The desired EOL markers can also be set to a specific value
  (`lf`/`crlf`/`native`), in which case all lines will unconditionally
  receive this marker.

        -E ENDING, --coerce-eol ENDING
        -e ENDING, --expect-eol ENDING
        -Ie, --ignore-eol

* Check for spaces followed by tabs in the whitespace at the beginning
  of a line; fixing this condition requires setting either
  `--change-tabs` or `--change-spaces`. The default is to report and
  **warn**:

        -s, --tab-space-mix
        -S, --report-tab-space-mix
        -Is, --ignore-tab-space-mix

* Change tabs in the whitespace at the beginning of a line to the
  specified number of spaces (default is not to change tabs at
  all). This option will *not* touch leading tabs when they are mixed
  with spaces, *unless* `--tab-space-mix` is also specified.

        -x SPACES, --change-tabs SPACES

* Change the specified number of consecutive spaces in the whitespace
  at the beginning of a line to tabs (default is not to change spaces
  at all). This option will *not* touch leading tabs when they are mixed
  with spaces, *unless* `--tab-space-mix` is also specified.

        -y SPACES, --change-spaces SPACES

Reporting
---------

Unless the `-q`/`--quiet` option is used, WTF will summarize each file
processed in which any whitespace issues were found and/or fixed. With
`-v` it will also report issue-free files.

    $ wtf -0 nightmare.txt    # -0 is equivalent to > /dev/null
    nightmare.txt LINE 8: WARNING: spaces followed by tabs in whitespace at beginning of line
    nightmare.txt:
        CHOPPED 1 lines with trailing space
        CHOPPED 0 blank lines at EOF
        ADDED newline at EOF
        CHANGED 1 line endings which didn't match crlf from first line
        WARNED ABOUT 1 lines with tabs/spaces mix

WTF will return the following exit codes on successful operation:

* `0`: no issues seen (or `-X`/`--no-exit-codes` specified)
* `10`: issues fixed
* `20`: unfixed issues seen

Todo
----

* Stability tests?
* Unicode tests?

Bugs
----
Corrupts source code files written in the [Whitespace programming language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whitespace_(programming_language)).

Anything else?

Author
------
&copy; Daniel Lenski <<dlenski@gmail.com>> (2014-2016)

License
-------
[GPL v3 or later](http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html)
